---
Title: Your Comms Team Needs a Developer
author: Greg Boone
layout: post
permalink: /blog/2014/10/18/your-comms-team-should-be-a-devops-team/
published: true
tags:
  - Communications
  - DevOps
loc: dc
---
![Word 1.0, no thanks I'll handwrite everything.](http://archive.wired.com/images/article/full/2008/11/ms_630px.jpg)
<br>_Don't let your website turn into Windows 1.0_

I recently [started working at 18F](2014-09-05-18f-hacking-bureaucracy) as
their first "comms person" which in a startup environment means you're the
person who does everything, just like everyone else, but you focus on
writing blogs, publishing the website, and pitching new ideas for how we
might communicate about what we do. Most of my work has been on [the
website](https://github.com/18f/18f.gsa.gov) and [a
dashboard](https://github.com/18f/dashboard) of all the work we do which has
taught me a really important lesson: __your website and how it is made, is
just as much a communications artifact as anything else your comms team
produces.__

Despite being on a communications team, I still write a lot of code. Writing
code, or being able to jump in and learn some, is increasingly important in
all kinds of jobs where people never used to have to write any code, and
communications is no different if only for the simple fact that
communications teams often end up owning most of the content and design of
their organization's website and if that website can't meet their needs it
causes rifts of trust between throughout the organization. Be they
operational, managerial, or customer facing, a breakdown in trust is toxic
and results in the web seeming useless to everyone.

Often this happens because the website was designed and developed to spec by
a freelancer or consultant on a one-time contract. An "expert" stands up a
shiny looking website that does everything the organization wants it to do,
trains a few people how to use it and leaves. Months (days?) later when
somebody wants to put more than one photo on a page, they contact the IT
department and are told "pages may only have one picture and it cannot be
larger or smaller than _x_ by _y_ dimensions." (True story.) Software is not
static, as people use it, they discover how it can do more for them. Imagine
if Microsoft stopped developing Word after it's initial release. Nobody
would use it because it would no longer be valuable.

What an organization can do with its website is _mission critical_, not just
for the communications team. Having a developer available who can make it
possible to have more than one photo on your page is as important as having
someone who can shoot and edit the photos.

Communications teams should have developers baked in from the start, and not
just for adding new features to the website. Having a developer on your
communications team means you have someone who can think about and build
other artifacts to augment your message. A developer might think to host
your website's code on GitHub, allowing other developers to learn from it
and offer feedback, or build an app to go along with a new initiative the
team is rolling out, or identify and fix usability problems with some
existing piece of the site.  

What your website is made of and how it works speaks volumes about your organization, both internally and externally. Internally, it makes your communications team a "yes first" team, or at least one where the reason for saying no to, say, putting more than one image on a page, is a communications one, not a technical limitation. And when there is a technical limitation, you can realistically evaluate whether it's possible to overcome it.

This doesn't mean fire your entire comms team or only hire developers, nor does it mean hiring one developer will be your silver bullet. Instead, focus on fostering your team as one that is equal parts traditional communications and software development. Build a team ready to say yes to what your organization needs and not dependent on some piece of technology nobody understands.

[Leave a comment](https://github.com/gboone/gboone.github.io/issues/new/)

[Edit my typos](https://github.com/gboone/gboone.github.io/pulls/new/)
