---
title: Coding on the 1s and 2s
date: '2015-01-27'
layout: post
tags:
- how I work
- music
- turntables
- productivity
loc: dc
---  
<img src="/assets/images/turntablism.jpg" alt="Brother Ali: Mourning in America and Living in Color (at 33 1/3 RPMs)" />

I ended up working from home today. Even though I probably could have made it
up the less-icy-than-expected hill our apartment is on by bike, I like working
from home and the weather was a convenient excuse. I like it because my
internet connecting is always surprisingly faster than dealing with the arms
race-like environment of enterprise WiFi and I get to choose how much to
interact with my co-workers and how much to focus.

One of my favorite parts of working form home is my turntable. At the office
it's really easy to sit for more than two hours with on my figeting in the
desk chair for movement. I have Rdio on blast when I'm trying to ignore the
din of my surroundings and to facilitate that developer hyperfocus we all know
and maybe love. At home, I have Rdio too, and I have my full iTunes library
which is cool. But I also have a turntable that forces me to get up and
stretch my legs once every 22ish minutes. I also get to listen to the same
artist for a stretch.

The timesavings are probably negligible. On the one hand records don't buffer
and playback isn't beholden to someone else's UI decisions. But the time spent
on those things is balanced (or possibly overtaken) by gawking at the record
collection looking for the next sheet of vinyl to spin. But the real advantage
is in taking my eyes off of my screen for a few minutes a couple times an
hour. I pop on the record and by the time side A ends I've either been
productive or gone down a rabbit hole. If the former, I get a break to digest
what I did before transitioning to the next thing; if the latter, I get a
chance to rescue myself. Either way, I get a brief mode switch. Flip the
record and repeat.

I can't work from home everyday, nor do I really want to. In light of that,
I'm hoping to find a way to recreate this cadence at the office.
